Hi and welcome to this video on reference counting.
So if we write this line of code my VAR equals 10 remember what's actually happening is pythoness creating
an object of type integer with a value of 10 at some memory address.
Let's say a thousand in this case and my VAR is a pointer to that object.
My VAR is actually the reference.
The memory address of that object in this case that's a 1000.
So we can start keeping track of these objects that are created in memory.
We can keep track of them by keeping track of their memory address and how many variables are pointing
to them.
How many other variables in our Python code are pointing to that same object.
So in this case we only have one reference.
And so the reference count for that memory address is 1.
But let's say we write this other line of code other var equals my VAR.
Now remember we are dealing with pointers right.
We're dealing with memory addresses preferences.
When we say other verticals my VAR we are not taking the value 10 and assigning it to other than we're
actually taking the reference of my VAR and assigning that reference 1000 to other than.
In other words other var is also pointing to that same object in memory.
So it's really important to understand that distinction.
We do not have to separate objects of value 10 and my VAR points to one and other var points to another
one.
No when we say other articles my VAR we're actually sharing the reference.
And so the counter in this case will go up to 2.
Right so the reference count is now to now let's say that my VAR goes away either it falls out of scope
or maybe we assign it to a different object in memory maybe even assign it to none then that reference
goes away.
And the reference count goes down to 1 and let's say others are also goes away.
So at some point in time maybe it goes out of scope.
Now there is nothing left and the reference count therefore drops down to zero at that point.
The Python memory manager recognizes that and says oh OK there's no object left.
I don't need it anymore.
There are no sorry there are no references left.
I don't need this anymore.
And it throws away the object and that object goes away and the space it used up can now be reused by
Python when it's running a program.
So this is called reference counting.
And that's something that the Python memory manager does for us.
We don't have to worry about this.
It's doing it automatically right.
But just keep in mind that's what's going on with the reference counting.
And when we create variables and then later we'll look at something else called garbage collection which
is related to this.
So when before we get to the code we're going to look very quickly at how we can find the reference
count of a variable in Python the CIS module has a get ref count function that we can use and we walked
by.
So it does get ref count and we pass in the variable name.
So we put the variable name in there and we'll look at that closer down the road.
But what's happening here is we're passing a reference to my VAR right.
We're passing that reference.
So when we pass my VAR to get ref count it's actually creating another reference to that same object
in memory.
Right.
So there's a kind of a downside to use an get ref count in that it always increases the reference count
by one because simply the act of passing my value to the function creates another reference to that
same variable because variables are passed by reference and Python and I get we'll get to that in detail
later.
So there is another function we can use that doesn't have that drawback.
It's in the C types module it's certainly at a lower level it's basically starting to dig down into
the C libraries.
And this is just what it is C types Dotsie long from address etc..
The difference here is that we're passing the memory address so id of my van.
So because we're passing the memory address not the reference we're passing the actual integer value.
Let's say a thousand in the example we had before.
It doesn't affect the reference count.
And so this is a truer more exact count of the number of references.
So let's switch to code and take a look at all that in some detail.
We'll start by looking at the sists module and we'll use the get ref count from that module first.
So we'll have to import it.
So it's imports this then we should create a variable and I'm going to use a list and we'll see and
some upcoming lessons why I'm not using an integer here.
Because you might be surprised at the answer we get.
So I'll create the variable a.
Now remember what does it mean by saying equals 1 2 3 1 2 3 was crater's an object in memory at some
memory address which we can find.
Let's call it Tom.
Well actually it's just printed out.
OK.
So that memory address.
Now when you run this code you'll get a different number of.
So we have this object created in memory and a points to that memory address is a pointer.
So now we can use the system to get ref counts and get ref count expects the variable name as its parameters.
So in this case.
Now what this means is that we're passing a to get ref count and its argument is taking the same reference
that 8 is telling it.
So it's going to point to the same object in memory.
So really a reference count is going to become to get ref count runs.
And indeed that's what we get to.
So you can use get ref count.
It's not an issue just.
Just remember to subtract 1 from that answer because the simple fact of passing a Instead of passing
the variable into it has increased the reference count by one.
So if you don't have to deal with that then we can use the C types library.
So we have to import C types first and then we have that long expression that I showed you in the slides.
So I'm going to create a wrapper function called ref count that's going to take the address.
And if you want to use annotations we can specify that the address is going to be an integer and it's
going to return that k.
So C types of C long dupped from address of the address which is the argument here the first argument
and the function datt value k.
That way we don't have to type that whole long expression every time.
So now we can get the reference count of a.
But we have to pass it the memory address so we can do ref count ID of a and we get a reference count
of 1 which is what we expect now now you might be thinking wait a minute you said that we get a rough
count here of two because we passed way into this function aren't we doing the same thing here.
We're passing a inside this function why isn't the reference count too.
Well what's happening is idea of a is getting evaluated first.
So indeed when we call the idea of a one ID is running then the reference count to that memory address
1 8 3 1 0 1 1 5 is 2 right because it's got a reference we passed it as a parameter.
So the argument of that function has a reference to that same object in memory.
So at that point the reference is too.
But Id then finishes running and returns the memory address.
OK what we have up here.
So by the time we call ref count ID has finished running and it has released its pointer to that memory
address.
Right.
That point is gone.
So now the reference count is indeed back to 1.
Right.
So this is no different than doing it this way.
Let me copy the memory address that we just took pass it in here and we get ref count of 1.
So that's exactly the same thing right.
So don't be confused by the fact that the ref count is 1 even though it's huge.
That's because by the time ref count is called ID has finished running it has already returned the memory
address and therefore it has released whatever reference it had to that memory address.
OK.
So now we have equals 1 to 3.
Let's go ahead and say B is equal to a K so b equals a.
And now we can call ref count again on the ID of a.
Well before we do that let's take a look at the idea of B.
Let's just make sure that it is indeed pointing to the same location in memory and it is as you can
see a and b are both pointing to the same location in memory.
So our reference count should be 2.
So we can say ref count of the ID.
Now we can use either a or b they're identical.
And we can see the ref count is two we can go further and say C is equal to A and we can look at the
ref count of the ID of a.
And again now we have a reference count of three.
Now if I change C to something else if I say sequel's 10 for example.
Now if I do a rough count of ID of AA you'll see the ref count is back down to 2.
And if I said the equal to maybe none OK then we can do ref count of ID.
Now I have to use a I can't use idea of B because that would be a different object.
Right.
The idea of B let's put that in quick idea of B as you can see is not the same as it was before.
That's because we've said be equal to none which is actually a real object that has no existence in
memory that it's pointing to.
So if I look at the reference count of a however I get down to 1.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to store the memory address so I'm going to say ID equals ID of
a.
Then I'm going to set a whole to none.
And then we're going to call ref count on a ID.
Now the reason why I'm doing that is because I cannot call ref count an idea of a after offset equal
to none.
I still want to look at the original memory address.
OK.
So now the answer you're going to get here may very well be different than the answer I'm gonna get
and I'll get into that into a lot more detail later.
But let's take a look.
So I still have a reference count of 1 for a.
That's just weird or you know for that old memory address.
OK so maybe I'll run it again and now it's 0 OK or if I run it again.
Not some weird value.
All right.
So this is because we are using that C library.
So we are actually in this code we are specifying the memory address.
We're interested in care which was this memory address over here when the last reference to that memory
address was dropped when we set a call to none.
Remember what happens the memory manager frees up that memory address essentially tosses away the object
and that memory address becomes available for something else.
And that's what we're seeing here.
Right.
So typically in python we don't work with memory addresses.
I'm just doing that as an illustration.
And just to try and understand what's going on behind the scenes but what's happening here is that what
is stored at that memory address once I said able to none.
We don't know what's stored in there.
It's probably just junk.
Right.
Or maybe something else.
So in python we never deal with memory addresses directly.
It's very dangerous to do that.
And as you can see here you can't rely on that.
OK.
So we've got to be careful.
Again just for illustration purposes you're never going to have to use that in Python unless you're
trying to debug stuff or figure out you know what's going on especially with things like memory leaks.
All right.
So I'll see you in the next lesson.
Well we'll talk about garbage collection which is related to reference counting but it is not the same
as reference counting it's a different process that Python utilizes to also keep up with you know cleaning
up the memory and keeping things freed up so we don't have memory leaks.
So you know it's.